Fore! Foreign! Foreign!
I'm not so interested in
anymore.
Forech. Forech.
But I tell you one thing which may
surprise a few of you. Um I'm not so
interested in LLMs
anymore. You know the kind of the last
thing that are in the hands of you know
industry product people kind of you know
improving at the margin uh trying to get
you know more data more compute
generating synthetic data. Um, I think
there are more interesting questions in
uh four four things. How do you get
machines to understand the physical
world? And Jensen talked about this this
morning in this keynote. How do you get
get them to have persistent memory,
which not too many people talk about and
then the last two are how do you get
them to reason and plan? And there is
some effort of course to get you know
LLMs to reason but in my opinion it's a
very kind of simplistic way of viewing
um viewing reasoning. I think there are
probably kind of more you know better
way of of doing this. So um so I'm
excited about things that a lot of
people in this community in the tech
community might get excited about five
years from now. Um, but right now
doesn't look so exciting because it's
some obscure academic paper.
can
um so a lot of people are working on
world models, right? So what is a world
model? World model is we all have world
models in our in our mind. Uh this is
what allows us to um kind of you know
manipulate thoughts essentially. So, you
know, we have a model of the of the
current world. You you know that if I if
I push on this on this bottle here from
the top, it's probably going to flip,
but if I push on it at the bottom, it's
it's going to slide. Um, and you know,
if I press on it too hard, it's might
pop. So, we have models of the physical
world that we acquire in the first few
months of life. And that's what allows
us to deal with the real world. And it's
much more difficult to deal with the
real world than to deal with language.
And so the the type of architectures
that I think we need for systems that
really can deal with the real world is
completely different from the ones that
we deal with at the moment. Right? LM's
predict tokens, right? But tokens could
be anything. I mean, so our, you know,
autonomous vehicle model uses tokens,
tokens from the sensors and it produces
tokens that drive. And in some sense,
it's reasoning about the physical world
at least where it's safe to drive and
you won't run into poles.
Why why aren't tokens the right way to
represent the physical world? Tokens are
discrete. Okay. So, when we talk about
token, generally we talk about uh a a a
finite set of possibilities. In a
typical LLM, the number of possible
tokens is on the order of 100,000 or
something like that, right? Um, so when
you train a system to predict tokens,
you can never train it to predict the
exact token that's going to follow a
sequence in text for example. But you
can produce a probability distribution
of all the possible tokens in your
dictionary. You know, it's just a long
vector of 100,000 numbers between zero
and one that's to one. We know how to do
this.
We don't know how to do this with u with
video with what you know natural data
that is highdimensional and continuous
and every attempt at trying to get
system to understand the world or build
mental models of the world by being
trained to predict videos at the pixel
level basically have failed. Um, even at
the even to train a system like a a
neural net of some kind to learn good
representations of images, every
technique that works by reconstructing
an image from a corrupted or transformed
version of it basically has failed, not
completely failed. They kind of work,
but they don't work as well as
alternative architectures that we call
joint embedding, which essentially don't
attempt to reconstruct at the pixel
level. they try to learn a
representation an abstract
representation of the image or the video
or the natural uh signal that is is
being trained on so that you can make
prediction in that abstract
representation space. Um the example I
use very often is that if I take a video
of this room and I kind of pan a camera
and I stop here and I ask the system to
predict you know what's the continuation
of that video. It's probably going to
predict it's a room and there's people
sitting blah blah blah. it can there's
no way it can predict what every single
one of you looks like, right? That's
completely unpredictable from the
initial segment of the video. And so
there's a lot of things in the world
that are just not predictable. And if
you train a system to predict at a pixel
level, it spends all of its resources
trying to come up with details that it
just cannot invent. And so that's just a
complete waste of resources. And every
attempt that we've tried and I've been
working on this for 20 years uh of
training a system using self-s
supervised learning by predicting video
doesn't work. It only works if you do it
at a representation level. And what that
means is that those architectures are
not are not generated. If your
business
transformer transformer
Fore. So first of all I think uh you
know Jensen is absolutely right that uh
you get ultimately more power in a
system that that can sort of you know
reason. I I disagree with the fact that
the proper way to do reasoning is the
way you know current L&Ms that that have
are augmented by by reasoning abilities.
You're saying it works but it's not the
right way. It's not the right way. I
think uh you know when when we reason
when we think we do this in some sort of
abstract mental mental uh state that has
nothing to do with language like you
don't like kicking the tokens out you
want to be reasoning in your um latent
space and abstract space right I mean if
I if I tell you you know imagine a cube
floating in front of you and now rotate
that cube by 90 degrees around a
vertical axis okay you can do this
mentally has nothing to do with language
um you know a cat could do this uh we
can't specify the problem to a cat
obviously through language but you know
cats do things that are much more
complex than this when they plan like
you know some trajectories to jump on a
piece of furniture right they do things
that are much more complex than that and
um that is not related to language it's
certainly not done in so you know token
space which would be kind of actions
it's done in sort of abstract mental
space so that's uh that's kind of the
challenge of the of the next few years
um which is to figure out new
architectures that allow this type of of
things that's been working on for the
last. So, so is there a new model we
should be expecting that allows us to do
reasoning in this abstract space? U it's
called we call it JPA uh or JPA world
models and we've you know um my my
colleagues and I have kind of put out a
bunch of uh papers on this kind of you
know first steps towards towards this
over the last few years. So JPA means
joint emitting predictive architecture.
is those world models that learn
abstract representations and are capable
of sort of manipulating those
representation uh and and and perhaps
reason and produce sequences of actions
to you know arrive at a particular goal.
I I think that's the that's the future.
I wrote a long paper about this that
explains how this might work about about
three years
ago.
foreign.
We
Foreign speech. Foreign speech.
Fore! Fore!chch!
We speech.
for we
jpeed jpai.
The alternative that we have now is a
project called VJEPA and we are at
getting close to version two where
basically it's one of those joint
emitting predictive architectures. So it
does prediction on on video but at the
representation level and it seems to
work really well. We have an example of
this. The first version of this is
trained on very short videos, just 16
frames and is trained to uh basically
predict the representation of full video
from a version of of a partially masked
one. And that system apparently is able
to tell you whether a particular video
is physically possible or not, at least
in restricted cases. And it gives you a
binary output. This is feasible. This is
not or maybe well no it's simpler than
this. You you measure the prediction
error that the system produces. So you
take a sliding window of those 16 frames
on a video and you look at you know can
you predict like the next few frames and
you you measure the prediction error and
when something really strange happens in
the video like an object disappears or
changes shape or or you know something
like that or spontaneously appears or
doesn't obey physics. So it's it's
physically realistic just by observing
videos. Yeah these are you know I mean
you train it on natural videos and then
you test it on synthetic video where
something really weird happens right? So
if you trained it on videos where really
weird things happen, that would become
normal and it wouldn't uh Yeah, that's
right. detect those as being odd. Yeah.
So you don't do that.
No, I mean it's and it corresponds a bit
to like if you
um you know baby humans uh take a while
to learn uh intuitive physics like the
the the fact that you know an object
that is not supported falls. So
basically the effect of gravity. Babies
learn this around the age of nine
months. So if you show a five or six
months baby a scenario where an object
appears to float in the air, they're
they're not surprised. But by nine
months they or 10 months, they they look
at it, you know, with huge eyes and you
can actually measure that like
psychologists have ways of measuring the
attention. And what that means is that
the internal world model, mental model
of the world of the infant is being
violated. Mhm. The baby is seeing
something that she doesn't think is
possible, not not doesn't match
expectations, right? And so she has to
look at it to correct her internal role
model to say like, you know, maybe I
should learn about this.
LM so I mean this this this kind of
reasoning in abstract space idea is
going to be expensive computationally at
runtime and it it connects with
something that we're all very familiar
with right so psychologists talk about
system one and system two. System one is
tasks that you can accomplish without
really sort of thinking about them. They
they've become you become used to them
and you you can accomplish them without
thinking too much about them. So if you
are an experienced driver, you can drive
even without driving assistance. You can
drive without thinking about it much.
You know, you can talk to someone at the
same time. You can, you know, um etc.
But if you
are a a if you drive for the first time
for the first few hours you are you are
the wheel you have to really focus on
what you're doing right and you're
planning all kinds of catastrophe
scenarios and stuff like that imagine
all kind of kind of things. So that's
system two. You're recruiting your
entire prefrontal cortex to your your
world model your internal world model to
uh figure out the you know what's what's
going to happen and then plan action so
that good things happen. Um whereas when
you're familiar with this you you can
just use a system one and sort of uh do
this automatically. So this this idea
that you start by
uh you know using your world model and
you're able to accomplish a task even a
task that you've never encountered
before. Zero shot right you don't have
to be trained to solve that task. you
can just so you can just accomplish that
task without learning anything just on
the basis of your understanding of of
the world and your planning abilities.
That's what's missing in current
systems. But if you accomplish that task
multiple times, then eventually it gets
compiled into what's called a policy,
right? So a sort of reactive system that
allows you to just just accomplish that
task without without planning.
So the first thing this reasoning is
system two the sort of automatic
subconscious reactive policy that's
system
one can do system one and are trying to
inching their way towards system two but
ultimately I think we need a different
architecture for system two okay and and
do you think it'll be your was it Ja um
I think it's not going to be a
generative architecture if you want
system to understand the physical world
the physical world is much much more
difficult to understand than language.
We think of language as kind of the
epitome of human uh capability, you
know, intellectual capabilities. But in
fact, language is simple because it's
discreet.
physical world is much much more
difficult to understand than language.
We think of language as kind of the
epitome of human uh capability, you
know, intellectual capabilities. But in
fact, language is simple because it's
discreet. And it's discreet because it's
a communication mechanism and it needs
to be discreet. Otherwise, it wouldn't
be noise resistant. you wouldn't be able
to understand what I'm saying um right
now and so it's simple for that reason
but the real world is just much more
complicated like okay here's something
that you some of you may have heard me
say in the past current LLMs are trained
typically with something like on the
order of 30 trillion tokens right tokens
typically is about three bytes so that's
0.9 10^ the 13 bytes let's say 10 to the
14 bytes
um that would take any of us over
400,000 years to read through that
because that's kind of the totality of
all the text available on the internet.
Right now, a the psychologists tell us
that a 4-year-old has been awake a total
of 16,000
hours and we have about 2 megabytes
going to our visual cortex through our
optic nerve um every second. 2 megabytes
per second roughly.
Multiply this by 16,000 hours times
3600. It's about 10 to the 14 bytes. In
four years through vision,
you see as much data as text that would
take you 400,000 years to read. I mean,
that tells you we're never going to get
to AGI, whatever you mean by this, by
just training from text. It's just not
happening.
Fore! Foreign! Foreign!